The tape doesn't ring on this tape recorder.
That's one of the things a rented recorder doesn't
do. I guess you were talking about people speaking
loudly or not speaking loudly. Some of us, that's
just a question of where you are and what you're
doing. I can get up on the bridge of a ship and be
heard at a distance, and so if it's necessary, I can
do it. It's like the people with whom I were
associated with in the Army. I could certainly
hear what all the officers said to me without any
problem, best I could tell. You entered Berkeley
in 37 in physics. Right. Okay. Did you have any
design towards oceanography when you enrolled at
Berkeley? Oh, I would say I didn't even know there
was such a thing as oceanography at that stage in
the game. I learned fairly quickly, though, that
there was. I guess... Within the first couple of
years, I ran onto some books in the physics
department. I leaned towards physics, although
that wasn't what I really started in at Berkeley,
but nevertheless I got involved in the physics
department at Berkeley fairly early on. They had a
nice little library and there were some
oceanographic books there, but I really didn't
have any feeling that this was something in which
one could make a living or anything of this kind. In
fact, it really was only barely that as I found out
soon.
So I really didn't have any thought of that. I was
interested in the ocean and I, as I mentioned, was
involved with the Naval ROTC at Berkeley at that
period. So I was interested in going to sea and
working with the ocean, even though I was, in fact,
really pushing toward
a career as a physicist. So you participate almost
at once in the Naval ROTC, but I notice you don't
really enter the Navy until June of 41. Well, no, I
was in Naval ROTC for the full four years at
Berkeley, and I was commissioned As a result of
that, I had a Navy commission when I graduated in
May of 1941 from Berkeley, and things were kind of
beginning to slip over the brink toward war at that
point in the United States. practically
everybody in my class in Naval ROTC was given
orders to active duty within the first month or two
after we graduated, even though the war hadn't,
didn't start until December. But several of us, a
bunch of us, went off to Navy submarine school in
New London, Connecticut. And after that I went
down I had the privilege of being the first Naval
Reserve Officer to stand one in a submarine school
class, and he went off to the Philippines to join
the submarine. Late in 1941, and that's where I was
in December of 1941,
the United States got directly involved in the war
situation. I spent practically the entire war
period as an officer in submarines one way or
another. I take it from such things as silver and
bronze stars in World War II that you were, in
effect, the line officer all during the war, not
involved in any of the research like Revell and
these people. No, I was not involved in
oceanographic research. In fact, most of the
people that I knew at that stage in the game who had
not been in ROTC, my colleagues in ROTC, and the
physics department had all gone off to places like
Oak Ridge and Los Alamos. And so I really knew, by
implication, more about what was going on there
than I did about oceanography. I learned the hard
way about underwater acoustics and things of that
sort because we had sonar systems, very primitive
ones, in the beginning on onboard submarines. I
learned also about internal waves in the ocean and
things like this just by the fact that periodic
buoyancy changes in your submarine if you were
operating close to the surface were things that
you had to cope with. But I had no intention at that
point of becoming an oceanographer per se.
Late in the war, as things were winding down, I had
the opportunity of going off to Harvard as part of a
Navy postgraduate thing. And in fact, the war
ended while I was at Harvard, or just as I went to
Harvard. And so I had a choice of either staying in
the Navy or finishing off that one-year graduate
course still in the Navy and then going back to an
active status. And I elected to finish the course.
At that point I chose to go back to Berkeley, which I
did in 1946, back to the physics department and to
work toward a doctor's degree. So you worked
really towards... I was involved in basic physics
still at that point, and the group with which I
became involved was in fact under Professor
Emilio Segre, who eventually got the Nobel Prize,
but not until after I left. And that was high energy
nuclear physics. And of course, that's what that
physics department was famous for. But it was also
a very good department in that it was very strong on
classical physics as well as in those days, as well
as in high grade research in the nuclear side of the
game. And when I finished my degree, I had been
active in the, I had stayed active in the Submarine
Naval Reserve. I was the commander of a naval
reserve unit in the San Francisco Bay Area during
that period. And so when I finished off my degree, I
was kind of tempted to do something that would
combine the nuclear physics and the submarine.
And so I Most of the places that I visited in the
inevitable job hunting period that comes right at
the end of the degree, several of them anyway, were
places that were involved in the then very new
nuclear power business, which was solely tied up
with some new sorts of things. And I wound up just
because of this sort of coalition between the
submarine interest and the physics interest. And
while I was there, I hadn't been there even a year,
and came out for a visit back to San Francisco area,
which is where I was born. And at that point, I got a
call from a friend of mine with whom I had worked as a
graduate student. He was still a graduate
student, just about to finish off. And he had been
approached by Scripps to come down here and talk
about a possible job in marine physics. This
fellow had an army background. It happened that he
knew one of the people who was helping to search for
somebody to fill a vacancy. And so he told the
people who were talking to him that I was around and
that I was a physicist, but I was much more
interested in the ocean than he was, and that they
should ask me to come down. So they asked both of us
to come.
came on down and turned out that one of the members
of the Marine Physical Laboratory was about to go
off for a year. He had been running sort of a very
nice program in underwater acoustics that was of
considerable interest to the Navy and sponsored
by the Office of Naval Research. And they wanted a
physicist who could carry this on while he was
away, and they were looking toward expanding the
size of the laboratory somewhat anyway, so they
were recruiting, and they made an offer to both
Thompson, who was the other fellow with me, who
eventually became an Atomic Energy
Commissioner, and died tragically in an airplane
crash while he was doing an inspection, site
inspection thing over in Nevada. But anyway, they
offered me a job and I really, the contrast with the
Knowles Atomic Power Laboratory where there were
a couple thousand people working on sort of
building one very sophisticated engine and this
sort of thing where I could come and have a little
research group and see the whole program in my hand
and control it and do something that was directly,
that interacted directly with the ocean. It was at
that point that I clearly made the move that I never
regretted at all. It was a very good thing, just
personally.
So I came here and started doing underwater
acoustics and sonar system sorts of things. This
was again a good, it built well on my background
because I could take the good classical physics
that I had worked hard on at Berkeley and combine it
with the submarineing that I had been doing
because it turned out that a lot of us underwent
acoustics at that stage in the game. In order to
have quiet platforms from which to do acoustic
measurements, we did a lot by working with the
submarine force local in here. We would go out on
the submarine and huddle and do some propagation
tests and things of this kind. And so the fact that I
could argue with a submarine commanding officer
helped me a great deal in being able to make this
sort of thing go. I have several questions I'd like
to ask for 46 to 51. Did you do organized submarine
research while you were attending Berkeley? You
have an abbreviation there. It's Organized
Submarine RES, which stands for Reserve. I ran a
Navy Organized Submarine Reserve training unit
in that area throughout that period. Helped to
write the training programs and things like this
because it was a completely new sort of
enterprise. There had never been a submarine
component to the Naval Reserve until after World
War II. And so I did that in parallel with the work
toward the PhD in nuclear physics. Okay, and your
work in nuclear physics was really in what
direction? What kind of research were you doing in
Berkeley? I was working on, well the thesis had to
do with, actually that's been a long time, I was
working with the by then sort of intermediate
energy cyclotron in the Crocker laboratory there
that had a power range up to 23 muv and doing studies
of heavy
elements bombarding them with particles and
looking to see what kinds of reactions would
result, particularly things around aluminum and
lead and this sort of business. There were some
interesting
short-half-lived alpha emitters that had not
been studied. It was that sort of thing that
unraveled a few odds and ends, and that became a
thesis. Were you involved with the Atomic Energy
Commission at this time? Only in that I held an
Atomic Energy Commission fellowship for one of
the years that I was working on the doctor's
degree. Of course, at the North Atomic Power
Laboratory, that was an organization that was in
fact funded by the Atomic Energy Commission.
Okay, now, when you become director of NPL, were
you able then to guide the research activities of
the lab? Well, directing a laboratory isn't I had
built
up my own research in underwater acoustics and
marine geophysics and basically this
laboratory, it's a small one, we had a handful of
very talented people And the main function of the
director was to see that the life went reasonably
smoothly for them and to get out of their way at the
right times.
And at the same time, since it's a small
laboratory, I was able to keep my own research
going. And this has worked out pretty well over the
long haul. I had been here at the laboratory about
six years before I became director. We had had two
previous directors who were both, I think, quite
influential in
my life. One of them was the man who basically
recruited me to come here in the first place, Carl
Eckhart, who was a distinguished physicist, who
had become involved in the University of
California Division for Research during World
War II, and played a major role in that
organization. And then he had been figure in
theoretical matters and quantum mechanics and
thermodynamics and things of this kind. When he
came out here during the war he became quite
interested in the ocean and in particular in a sort
of missionary sense I guess because he was a very
fine person in his ability to see how to apply
high-grade mathematical methods to problems
that other people hadn't yet applied them to. and
he did this during the war in the sonar and
acoustics business and when the war ended he
decided he really didn't want to go back to the
University of Chicago and so he convinced the navy
that they should set up a laboratory within the
University of California because he didn't
really want to stay in the navy civil service
laboratory situation which was what in fact the
University of California Division of War
Research at the end of the war, was kind of mostly
turned into an organization called the Navy
Electronics Laboratory. Descendants of that
still exist here on the planet today. And at the
same time, he arranged that the Marine Physical
Laboratory should be established within the
University of California. It was not really a part
of Scripps' institution of oceanography. It was
just an entity within the university with Eckhart
as its director. part of the reason he was able to do
this, and was encouraged to do it, was that one of
the people with whom they were dealing in
Washington, in the Navy Bureau of Ships, in the
sonar design branch, was a commander named Roger
Revell, who was on leave from Scripps, and so he was
at the other end of this sort of thing, and within
that framework, it had been decided
they would go ahead and do this thing establishing
a small laboratory that the Navy would fund, which
would focus on problems in underwater acoustics
and similar concepts, but which would be somewhat
different from the in-house Navy laboratories
which were then growing up, which would be rather
more engineering oriented, but this would be more
basic science oriented. And so that was basically
the way this sort of thing started. Eckart, in
1948, became director of scripts for a while.
After a 20
minute hiatus, Eckart did become director of
scripts at that point.
decided that there was no reason that there should
be a small laboratory, the Marine Physical
Laboratory in the San Diego area and the rather
larger Scripps Institution, and so he decided to
make the Marine Physical Laboratory de facto a
division of the Scripps Institution. And the
laboratory has maintained that position ever
since. In fact, I guess it's the oldest existing
administrative subdivision of the institution.
And that explains how you could be director of MPL
and also associate director of Scripps
Institution of Oceanography? Well, that goes
another way too in that
Eckhart moved from being director of MPL to being,
for a brief time, the director of Scripps because
Sverdrup left in a fairly sudden manner. And so
Eckhart kind of held the place together while they
girded themselves up to recruit Roger Revelle to
be the director of Scripps. And as you know,
Revelle was the director for some considerable
length of time. in 19, must have been late 61,
something like that, Ravel,
now this is a sort of trick situation, Ravel had
been heavily involved in the development of the
new campus here, the full-scale University of
California campus. And in about 1961, they
things had developed to the point at which they
were going to appoint a chancellor for the campus
and the decision was made not to appoint Ravel.
He obviously was disappointed as were many of the
rest of us who had worked with him because he had
been sort of using Scripps or Scripps had used
itself to help with the overall development of the
campus and a lot of us felt we had a lot at stake and we
were not really all that pleased when this
happened, but nevertheless it did, and so it must
have been the fall of 61. Roger
decided that since the Chancellor had been
appointed, Herb York, who was a perfectly good
man, a very good man, Roger accepted a position as
science advisor to the head of the Department of
Interior, I guess it was. In fact, I think he was the
first of the departmental science advisors. And
so he went off to Washington. And what he left
behind him was essentially a complex of three
jobs, chief campus officer, the head of what was
then the School of Science and Engineering, which
was the beginning of the general campus here, and
the directorship of the Scripps Institution. And
I was asked, at that point, to take on the
directorship of the Scripps Institution, which I
did, much in the same vein as Eckhart, before me,
had stepped from the Marine Physical Laboratory.
And I'm not sure whether it's because my office is
off the campus and all the other people at Scripps
are on the campus, and maybe the Marine Physical
Laboratory director, therefore, is thought to be
a little more neutral and, therefore, more
acceptable in this. context anyway. He,
Roger left and I took over as the director for a
period of close to two years. It was a particularly
interesting thing if you're interested in
coincidences and that sort of business in the
history of science because the three of us who
wound up taking the three parts of Ravel's job had
all been graduate students together in the
physics department at Berkeley simultaneously.
Herb York and I were in the same research group. We
both did our degrees for Segre. Keith Bruckner,
who was a theoretical physicist who was head of the
School of Science and Engineering at that point,
he and I had been teaching assistants together in
courses around 1950 at Berkeley. And we'd all
three arrived by completely different I guess in a
sense the only one who arrived really
legitimately was Berkner because he stuck with
the physics business and came to, eventually came
to UCSD to head up the physics department and then
took over as head of the school of science and
engineering when Roger left. Herb York had gone
the route of administration and so forth, having
gone to ARPA and the Defense Research and
Engineering Establishment in Washington before
coming here. He, in fact, had been involved in
things of that kind even at Berkeley when he was
quite young, because he was,
I can remember, he was sort of in charge of
scheduling and things of this kind on the
cyclotrons, while I was still a graduate student
at Berkeley. probably right by the most
illegitimate means, because I had, in fact, just
plain abandoned physics, more or less, and
although up till that point, I guess I still, we can
talk about when did I become interested in
oceanography or something like that. When the
manpower questionnaires come by, you write in,
they always want you to say whether you're a
physicist or whatever, and I had been putting down
physicist or geophysicist every year until I got
to be director of Scripps. And I figured there was
no way I could honorably do that anymore. So at that
point I decided I was in oceanography. I'd been
around Scripps for about nine years at that point.
And I think that in much of oceanography this is the
way, certainly in those years, this was the way it
went. That people came in. usually on an
opportunistic basis, which mine certainly was. I
didn't come in because I went looking for a job in
oceanography. The job came looking for me. Once I
saw it, I didn't hesitate very long. But
nevertheless, that's the way oceanography did
develop in that sort of ten-year period. And I
think that's one of the places where Ravel was very
good, that he had tentacles out and could bring in
interesting people to populate this growing
institution that we had. do it in such a way that the
people who would come mostly came initially with
the idea that whatever the particular discipline
was in which they were involved was probably
capable of solving most of the problems of
oceanography or something of this kind, or at
least they weren't necessarily initially
interdisciplinary people. By the time they'd
been around for a few years, you began to interact
with the other people in the group and eventually
you got to where a lot of us are pretty strongly
interdisciplinary oriented. We can work with
people who have completely different
philosophies about how to do one experiment, the
last. A half dozen of my graduate students have
been marine geologists, and they just don't think
the way physicists do. But I've learned that there
are many ways of thinking about science, and that
geologists' ways are sometimes the right way to
attack a problem, particularly if it's a problem
in the real world as opposed to a laboratory-type
problem. physicists have brought up with a sort of
laboratory orientation. This is really not the
only one that one should have if one is going to
study the ocean.
When you become associate director of Scripps
Institution, what sort of... This was not... I was
the director of Scripps Institution at that
point. That was in 1961 to 1963. Then Ravel came
back from Washington and took over again as
director of Scripps. And I went back to being... I
had retained the directorship of the Marine
Physical Laboratory during this period, and I
became also, at that point, moved over to being
chairman of the Department of Oceanography, as
well as the director of FDL. Revelle then left for
good, about, when was that, 64 or 65, I mean, there
someplace, He was back for the order of a year, year
and a half. And then he went off to Harvard. And that
was a permanent dissociation. And again, I took
over the directorship of Scripps for about a year,
during which time we made a search for a permanent
director. And the end result was recruiting Bill
Nirenberg to be the director. And he started in
1965, I guess. And it was at that point that he asked
me to be one of the associate directors. I guess
partly just out of politeness or whatever,
because I've been in the front office for so long,
but in any event, this has continued. It's a kind of
associate directorship that sometimes has lots
of action associated with it and other times has
none. It's kind of a special assistant type thing
as opposed to some of the other associate
directors of scripts who have specific spheres in
which they act. Bob Fisher,
for example, who is associate director for
facilities, particularly for ships and that sort
of thing. So that was pretty much
how that sort of thing developed. I think that the
institution certainly has
hasn't changed all that much, I don't think. Some
people would say it's changed
a lot, I guess, but I think it's, in that it's grown,
it's become a little more difficult to recognize
explicitly the interdisciplinary things and the
sort of oneness of the place. When I first came, we
had Wednesday, lunches and everybody, a fair
number of the members of the staff would come and
bring their sack lunch and somebody would talk
about whatever was interesting to them. That's
the kind of thing that has gone away. I think this is
in part due to the growth of the general campus
itself as well as the growth of the institution.
Testing, one, two, three, testing. Testing, one,
two, three, testing. Testing, one, two, three,
testing.